\chapter{INTRODUCTION}
\label{introduction}

A Virtual Private Network (VPN) provides the illusion of a local area network
(LAN) spanning a wide area network (WAN) infrastructure by creating encrypted
and authenticated, secure\footnote{For the remainder of this document, unless
explicitly stated otherwise, security implies encryption and mutual
authentication between peers.} communication links amongst participants.
Common uses of VPNs include secure access to enterprise network resources from
remote/insecure locations, connecting distributed resources from multiple
sites, and establishing virtual LANs for multiplayer video games over the
Internet.  VPNs in this context differ from others that provide ```emulation of
a private Wide Area Network (WAN) facility using IP facilities' (including the
public Internet or private IP backbones).  ''~\cite{ip_vpns}.  This style of
VPN is used to connect large sets of machines behind routers to a virtual
private WAN, whereas this dissertation focuses on the approach of connecting
individual resources into a private LAN.

As a tool enabling collaborative environments, VPNs can be useful for various
applications.  If friends and family require computer assistance and their
computer guru no longer lives nearby, the guru can remotely log into the
machine using a VPN running over the Internet despite networking constraints
between the two parties.  When traveling abroad, a user may wish that their
Internet traffic be kept private from the local network.  A VPN can be used to
route all Internet packets securely through the user's home or office network,
ensuring the user's privacy.  Many computer and video games have multiplayer
networking components that require direct connectivity.  Most of these games
rely on centralized servers for bootstrapping limiting their lifespan.  Players
of these games can continue playing through VPNs.  Small and medium businesses
may find VPNs useful for connecting desktops and servers across distributed
sites securing traffic to enterprise networked resources.  Independent
organizations that each have limited resources can combine together their
resources through a VPN to create a powerful computing grid.

The utility of the VPN described herein is illustrated by a collaborative grid
computing project, Archer~\cite{archer}.  Archer consists of over 700 core
resources as well as voluntary resources from the community to provide a
dynamic and decentralized grid environment for computer architecture
researchers to share and access compute cycles.  Use of centralized systems
would limit the scope of Archer and require dedicated administration, whereas
existing decentralized solutions require manual configuration of links between
peers, which is beyond the scope of Archer's target users.  Current P2P virtual
network (VN) approaches either lack scalability or proper security components
to be considered VPNs; whereas my approach applies naturally to such systems.

There are various VPN architectures that attempt to deal with the challenges
presented in these use cases.  In some, certain VPN approaches may work, where
others are not applicable, and in others scenarios, no current VPN approach is
applicable.  In general, successful deployment and use of VPNs face the
following challenges:  

\begin{itemize}

\item OVERLAY CONFIGURATION. Peers must be able to find each other in order to
bootstrap into the overlay and to establish links with specific users inside
the overlay.

\item CONNECTIVITY. Network asymmetries created by firewalls, NATs, and
Internet router outages motivate the use for VPNs.  One approach is to route
all traffic through a third party, but this incurs overheads.  There also exist
approaches to allow two peers behind NATs to communicate directly and falling
back to a relay if the two peers are behind too restrictive networks.

\item PEER MANAGEMENT. To ensure reliability and trust, a distributed system
should employ security.  Peer management involves providing and obtaining
security credentials as well as preventing misbehaving peers from communicating
with a user's resource or excluding them entirely from the system.

\item PRIVACY. The original intention for VPNs was network security, thus all
communication between peers is private.  Many VPNs only secure traffic between
hops and are thus susceptible to man-in-the-middle attacks.  Unfortunately,
establishing end-to-end privacy can be challenging as it requires additional
out-of-band exchanges.

\item ENDPOINT CONFIGURATION. Applications transfer packets through a network
interface.  Endpoint configuration is necessary to enable sending and receiving
packets from userspace through the VPN.

\end{itemize}

Collaborative environments can strongly benefit from a VPN that is both
user-friendly as well as scalable.  A system that is only user-friendly will
initially attract interest but frustrate users in the long run, while systems
lacking user-friendliness may have limited user adoption.  By applying these
requirements to the aforementioned challenges leads to the following goals:
(1) a collaborative VPN should be easy to configure, such that users should be
able to deploy and use them without being experts in operating systems (OSs) or
networks; (2) the system should not require additional resources to support
more users; (3) adding new users and resources should be straight-forward using
approaches familiar to common users; (4) peers should be able to connect to
each other directly if and when possible; and (5) all communication, not just
hop-by-hop, should be secure.

While existing VPNs are able to meet some of these requirements, they are
unable to meet them all.  Centralized approaches (e.g.  OpenVPN~\cite{openvpn})
by their very nature require dedicated infrastructures and do not allow direct
communication between peers, though when configured to do so are able to
guarantee all-to-all communication regardless of NAT and firewall conditions.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) based approaches (e.g.  Hamachi~\cite{hamachi},
Wippien~\cite{wippien}, Gbridge~\cite{gbridge}, PVC~\cite{pvc}) solve the issue
of direct communication, though they are vulnerable to man-in-the-middle
attacks when session management is handled by an external provider, rely on a
central resource for the creation of VPN links, and require managed relays if
direct peer communication across NATs and firewalls fails.  Distributed
approaches (e.g., ViNe~\cite{vine}, Violin~\cite{violin}, VNET~\cite{vnet},
tinc~\cite{tinc}) require manual configuration of links between members of the
virtual network.  Existing P2P overlay approaches lack scalability
(N2N~\cite{n2n} and P2PVPN~\cite{p2pvpn}) or are difficult to configure and
lack privacy (I3~\cite{i3}).

My work culminates in a novel design and implementation of a VPN from endpoint
configuration to overlay construction and organization resulting in an
autonomic VPN that bridges the gap between user-managed VPNs and those hosted
by third-party services.  The VPN builds on top of a P2P system used to
transparently handle network asymmetries and support address allocation and
resolution.  The P2P system organizes into a structured overlay, which supports
scalable, distributed data sharing via a distributed hash table (DHT).  Peers
search for each other by querying the DHT and then use constructs provided by
the P2P layer to form direct links or relays with remote peers.  Peer
management is handled through common social networking interfaces such as
dedicated group infrastructures or relationships based upon XMMP or Facebook.
Both the VPN and the overlay are secured by a common security filter framework,
which can be decentrally located and bootstrapped through existing overlays.
Finally, through various VPN models, users and system administrators can take
the same VPN software and install it in various environments with minimal
configuration overhead.

\section{Virtual Private Network Basics}

VPNs consist of two components: clients and servers~\footnote{The definition of
a server is VPN dependent, the general concept is a resource or set of
resources that maintain state in the system.  It might be a centralized
resource, an overlay, or even a client in the case of P2P systems.}.  Clients
discover other clients by means of servers or overlays.  Depending on the VPN
style, clients will then either communicate with each other through servers or
use them to establish direct links with each other.  While setup may be
different amongst the various VPNs, during run time, the environment provided
by a VPN client is the same regardless of how the server or overlay is
implemented.  

\begin{figure}
\centering
\epsfig{file=figs/vpn.png.eps, width=4in}

\caption[A typical VPN client]{A typical VPN client.  A VN device makes
application interaction with the VPN transparent.  Packets going to the VPN
destination are sent by routing rules to the VN device interfaced by the VPN
client.  The VPN client sends and receives packets from other VPN participants
via the hosts physical network device.}

\label{fig:vpn}
\end{figure}

Figure~\ref{fig:vpn} abstracts the common features of all VPNs clients, a
service and a virtual network (VN) device providing communication with the VPN
system and host integration, respectively.  During initialization, the VPN
service authenticates with the overlay by means of a centralized or distributed
service, independently with each peer, or some other means; then, optionally,
querying for information about the network, such as network address space,
address allocations, and domain name service (DNS) servers.  At which point,
the VPN enables secure communication amongst participants.

Clients can authenticate with the overlay using a variety of methods.  A system
can be setup quickly by using null (no) authentication or a shared secret such
as a key or a password.  Using accounts and passwords with or without a shared
secret provides individualized authentication, allowing an administrator to
block all users if the shared secret is compromised or individual users who act
maliciously.  Using unique private keys with corresponding signed certificates
provide a more secure approach, because it eliminates the feasibility of brute
force attacks.  The trade-offs in the approaches come in terms of security,
usability, and management.  While the use of signed certificates provides
better security than shared secrets, certificates require more configuration
and maintenance.  In a system comprising of non-experts, like many university
VPNs, the usual setup uses a shared secret and individual user accounts.
Secrets can be packaged with the VPN application, so long as it is distributed
through secure channels such as authenticated HTTPS.

A VN device allows networking applications to communicate transparently over
the VPN.  The VN device provides mechanisms for injecting incoming packets into
and retrieving outgoing packets from the networking stack, enabling the use of
common network APIs such as Berkeley Sockets, allowing existing applications to
work over the VPN without modification.  While there are many different types
of VN devices, TAP~\cite{tap} stands out from the rest due to its open source
and pervasive nature.  TAP allows the creation of one or more Virtual Ethernet
and / or IP devices and is available for almost all modern operating systems
including Windows, Linux, Mac OS/X, BSD, and Solaris.  A TAP device presents
itself as a character device providing read and write operations.  Incoming
packets from the VPN are written to the TAP device and the networking stack in
the OS delivers the packet to the appropriate socket.  Outgoing packets from
local sockets are read from the TAP device.

VN devices are no different than any other network device.  They can be
configured manually through command-line tools or OS' APIs or dynamically by
the universally supported dynamic host configuration process
(DHCP)~\cite{dhcp0, dhcp1}.  Upon the VN device obtaining an IP address, the
system adds a new rule to the routing table that directs all packets sent to
the VPN address space to be directed to the VN device.  Packets read from the
TAP device are encrypted and sent to the overlay via the VPN client.  The
overlay delivers the packet to another client or a server with a VN stack
enabled.  Received packets are decrypted, verified for authenticity, and then
written to the VN device.  In most cases, the IP layer header remains
unchanged, while VPN configuration determines how the Ethernet header is
handled.

\section{Computer Network Architectures}

All models for computer communication in distributed systems fall under two
categories:  centralized and decentralized.  Sub-classes of these categories
include hybrid systems with centralized session management and decentralized
communication and self-configuring, dynamic P2P systems.  The architectures
commonly used for implementing VPN systems are centralized organization and
communication, centralized organization and decentralized communication,
decentralized communication with manual organization, and decentralized
communication with automatic organization.

Systems with Centralized organization and communication consist of clients and
servers where all distributed peers are clients discovering and connecting, or
organizing, through a dedicated centralized resource. Clients never communicate
with each other directly, but rather every message between two clients must
traverse the server.  For instance, most online social networks (OSNs) are
representative of these type of systems.  Users of OSNs like
Facebook~\cite{facebook} and MySpace~\cite{myspace} communicate through
centralized environments, never directly to each other's computers.
OpenVPN~\cite{openvpn} represents this VPN approach.  These systems rely on
dedicated resources.  In the situation that a server goes offline or becomes
overwhelmed by the clients, the system is rendered useless.

Centralized organization and decentralized communication systems include the
first set of popular P2P systems, such as the original Napster, Kazaa, and VPNs
like Hamachi~\cite{hamachi}.  Similar to the client-server model, clients
connect to a server to find other clients, though instead of communicating
through the server, the clients form direct connections with each other.  These
approaches are limited by network address translation (NAT) and firewalls that
may prevent peers from communicating with each other.  In these cases, the
central server may act as a relay allowing the two clients to communicate
through it.  Unlike systems using centralized communication, these systems are
less susceptible to being overwhelmed by client traffic and even if the server
goes offline existing client links remain active, though new connections cannot
be established.

Systems employing decentralized communication with manual organization address
the issues of a central system going offline, because clients are configured to
connect to any number of distributed servers forming an overlay.  In these
systems, servers are explicitly configured to communicate with other servers.
Though this approach improves upon the performance and availability issues
inherent to completely centralized architectures, if a server goes offline any
systems communicating through it will no longer be connected to the rest of the
system until the administrator creates additional links or the server becomes
active again.  Clients in these systems do not typically form direct links with
each other; rather, they route packets through the overlay.  This approach has
been used to create scalable VPNs, like ViNe~\cite{vine}, VNET~\cite{vnet},
Violin~\cite{violin}, and Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol based VPNs~\cite{l2tp}.

In automatic organization-based decentralized communication systems, there is
no distinction amongst peers as they act as both client and servers, i.e., a
P2P system or overlay.  P2P systems are usually distributed with a list of
common peers.  A peer attempting to bootstrap into the P2P overlay randomly
selects peers on this list until it is able to connect with one.  This
connection is then used to form connections with other peers currently in the
overlay.  The overlay can be organized in two different forms: randomly or
deterministically creating unstructured or structured overlays, respectively.
In an unstructured overlay, links are formed arbitrarily, thus a peer searches
for another peer by broadcasting the message or using stochastic techniques.
In structured overlays, peers organize into topologies by deterministically
forming connections with peers nearby in the overlay address space creating
structures such as ring and hybercubes.  Peers can be found deterministically
using greedy routing approaches in usually $\log(N)$ time.
Gnutella~\cite{gnutella} file sharing system and Skype~\cite{skype} are popular
examples of unstructured systems, while P2PSIP~\cite{p2psip} and distributed
hash tables (DHTs)~\cite{chord} are popular in structured systems.  A challenge
in unstructured systems is finding data objects in reasonable amount of time,
while structured systems suffer when large amount of peers join or leave the
system, known as churn~\cite{opendht}.  In general, both approaches are
difficult to secure depending on the nature of the application and deployment.
When used in private environments though, they have been shown to be very
useful, exemplified by Dynamo~\cite{dynamo} or BigTable~\cite{bigtable}.

This dissertation uses structured overlays as the foundation in building
scalable, decentralized VPNs, the following section reviews structured
overlays.

\section{Structured Overlays}

Structured P2P overlays provide distributed querying systems with guaranteed
search time.  Unlike unstructured systems~\cite{unstructured_v_structured},
which rely on global knowledge/broadcast or stochastic techniques such as
random walks that take $O(N)$ time to guarantee finding data in the overlay,
structured overlays organize into well-defined geometries with support to
resolve queries within $O(\log(N))$ There exists a plethora of structured
systems found both in research and in available applications~\cite{pastry,
chord, symphony, kademlia, can, brunet}.  In order to obtain guaranteed search
time, structured systems self-organizing into well defined topologies, such as
a ring (pictured in Figure~\ref{fig:ring_overlay}) or a hypercube.  Peers
joining an overlay typically follow these abstracted steps:

\begin{figure}
\centering
\epsfig{file=figs/ring.eps, width=6in}
\caption{1-D ring structured overlay}
\label{fig:ring_overlay}
\end{figure}

\begin{enumerate}

\item generate or obtain a unique identification number (node ID) within the
overlay's address space, usually on the order of 128-bits to 256-bits;

\item attempt to connect to one or more random addresses from a pre-shared list
of well-known endpoints, dedicates resources from a service provider or users
with high uptime;

\item become connected to at least one peer in this list (leaf connection,
bootstrap peer);

\item find the set of peers in the address space closest to the node's ID;

\item establish connections or exchange connection information with those peers
(neighbor or near connections);

\item and finally connect to other nodes in the overlay outside the set of near
connections to enable quickly traversing the address space (shortcut or far
connections).

\end{enumerate}

All nodes are required to have a unique node ID.  Address collisions can cause
inconsistencies in the overlay, where one or both of the nodes will not be
able to properly connect to the overlay.  Furthermore, having uniformly
distributed node IDs enhances the utility of the shortcut connections.  To
obtain a good distribution of node IDs, either a central server can provide
the ID or each node independently of others can use a cryptographically strong
random number generator.  The former approach can be used to create a trusted
overlay by having the third-party sign each node IDs~\cite{secure_routing}.

In a ring, each node must be connected to closest neighbors in the node ID
address space, that is the node immediately before and after it.
Optimizations for fault tolerance suggest that for ring topologies the amount
should be at least 2 and up to $\log(N)$ on both sides.  Consider the case
when there is overlay disconnectivity potentially due to churn; a peer
receives a packet but cannot route it closer to the destination than itself
because it does not have a connection with that peer.  The message may either
be locally consumed or thrown away never arriving at its intended destination.
Increasing the number of near neighbor peers reduces the likelihood chances of
packets being lost due to churn, especially if peers leave suddenly without
warning.

As mentioned, shortcuts or far connections enable efficient routing in
ring-based and similarly designed structured overlays.  The various shortcut
selection methods include: maintaining large tables without using connections
and only verifying usability when routing messages~\cite{pastry, kademlia},
maintaining a connection with a peer at specific locations in the P2P address
space~\cite{chord}, or using locations drawn from a harmonic distribution in
the node address space~\cite{symphony}.

Structured overlays support decentralized query systems that can be used to
build distributed data structures such as a distributed hash table (DHT) by
mapping keys via a hash function to P2P IDs in an overlay.  The data associated
with the key is then stored at the node closest to the P2P id of the key and
for fault tolerance can be stored by other nodes nearby or more keys can be
generated by recursively hashing the original key.  Using the DHT primitives,
Past~\cite{past} and Kosha~\cite{kosha} projects have designed more complex
distributed data stores.

The actual mechanism for querying nodes or routing in a P2P overlay can be
either iterative or recursive.  In iterative routing, the querying node
iteratively contacts nodes closer and closer to the address until finding the
closest node at which point it makes the request directly to that node.  In
more detail, the querying node directly queries the node closest to the
destination, that node returns back one or more network (IP) and P2P addresses
of closer peers, the querying node queries these peers, and the process
continues until determining there exists no closer node.  Alternatively in
recursive routing, a querying peer sends the message to the peer closest to
the destination from its perspective, repeating the process until the message
has arrived at the closest peer to the address or the destination.  Compared
to recursive routing, iterative can be implement more easily though with
considerable overhead as each overlay query will cause $\log(N)$ connections
to form.  NATs further complicate the use of iterative routing as peers
attempting to connect with another peer behind a NAT will need the assistance
of a third-party, whereas recursive routing maintains active connections and
messages, seamlessly traversing NAT links and non-NAT links since the
connections are established prior to message transmission.

\section{Network Asymmetries}

Naive P2P systems assume network symmetry, that is any peer can communicate
directly with any other peer using the underlying infrastructure.  Unless the
software is run inside a LAN or an environment where the network topology is
well controlled and defined, symmetry cannot be guaranteed.  P2P used in wide
area systems often relies on the Internet.  Besides the potential routing
outages on the Internet, significant amount of resources which are not directly
accessible are connected to it.  The issue is only further pressed by the
current means of connecting to the Internet: Internet Protocol (IP) version 4
(IPv4) with its limited address space of only $2^{32}$ (approximately 4
billion).  With the Earth's population at over 6.8 billion and each individual
potentially having multiple Internet-capable devices, these limitations become
more apparent.

Currently the two approaches addressing IPv4 limitations are:  the use of
NATs to enable many machines and devices to share a single IP address but
preventing bidirectional connection initiation and IPv6 which supports
$2^{128}$ addresses.  The use of NATs, as shown in Figure~\ref{fig:nat},
complicates the bootstrapping of P2P systems as it prevents peers from simply
exchanging addresses with each other to form connections, as the addresses may
not be public.  In addition, firewalls may prevent peers from receiving
incoming connections.  Thus, while the eventual widespread use IPv6 may
eliminate the need for address translation, it does not deal with the issue of
firewalls preventing P2P applications from communicating as well as routing
outages, and it is not clear that IPv6 users will not continue to rely on
NAT/firewall devices to provide a well-defined boundary of isolation for their
local networks.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\epsfig{file=figs/NAT.eps, width=5in}
\caption[A typical NAT interaction]{A typical NAT interaction. The peer behind
a NAT has a private address.  When the packet is sent through the NAT, the NAT
translates the source information into a public mapping, keeping the original
source information so that if a packet from the remote peer comes back, it can
be translated and delivered to the original source.}
\label{fig:nat}
\end{figure}

When a machine, \textit{A}, behind a typical NAT, \textit{B}, sends out a
packet to an Internet host, \textit{C}, the NAT device translates the packet so
that it appears it is coming from the NAT device making the NAT device a
gateway.  When the packet is sent from \textit{A} to \textit{C}, the source and
destination are listed as $IP:port$ pairs, where the source and destination are
$IP_A:Port_A$ and $IP_C:Port_C$, respectively.  \textit{A} forwards the packet
to \textit{B} who transforms the source from $IP_A:Port_A$ to $IP_B:Port_B$,
where $Port_A$ may or may not be equal to $Port_B$.  This creates a NAT mapping
so that incoming packets from $IP_C:Port_C$ to $IP_B:Port_B$ are translated and
forwarded to $IP_A:Port_A$.

There are a handful of recognized NAT devices as presented in~\cite{stun,
p2p_nats_rfc}.  The following list focuses on the more prevalent types:

\begin{itemize}

\item FULL CONE. All requests from the same internal IP and port are mapped to
a static external IP and port, thus any external host can communicate with the
internal host once a mapping has been made.

\item RESTRICTED CONE. Like a full cone, but it requires that the internal host
has sent a message to the external host before the NAT will pass the packets.

\item PORT RESTRICTED CONE. Like a restricted cone, but it requires that the
internal host has sent the packet to the external hosts specific port, before
the NAT will pass packets.

\item SYMMETRIC. Each source and destination pair have no relation, thus only a
machine receiving a message from an internal host can send a message back.

\end{itemize}

Of the various scenarios involving peers and NATs, so long as one peer is on
any of the cone NATs and there are no firewalls, it can receive incoming
connection requests.  Challenges to this approach exist when firewalls are
introduced or both peers are behind symmetric NATs.  Firewalls may traffic that
would otherwise allow NAT traversal, whereas symmetric NATs require complex
mechanisms in an attempt to have incoming connection requests.  These types of
systems typically rely on a third-party to pass messages between the peers.

\section{Contributions}

The resulting expectations of a collaborative environment that addresses the
challenges listed in the introduction are self-configuring environments
enabling even non-experts to setup, deploy, and manage their own VPNs; peers
should communicate with each other directly when possible or through efficient
indirect paths when constrained; and the system should be reliable and ensure
the privacy of its users To address these requirements, I propose a novel
GroupVPN using structured overlays consisting of the following novel
contributions:

SECURE OVERLAYS. Typical overlays are secured using heuristics that limit the
effects of malicious users.  Challenges of using secure sessions for
instituting trust or security into an overlay depends on the communication
path ways.  If the goal for the system is to support asymmetries on the
network, then the system will have to make significant use of datagram
technologies.  This work proposes a unique filter mechanism to support
encrypting any form of communication between two parties and examines the
overheads of deploying it in simulated and real environments.

BOOTSTRAPPING AD-HOC, DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS. Secure overlays present a
challenge when there is a one to one mapping between overlay and VPN in order
to securely isolate a VPN.  This stems from the fact that at any given time,
peers may or may not be connected to the overlay.  When used in small groups,
most or all members may be behind NATs or remain online for short periods of
time, creating a situation where not a single user on a publicly addressable
resource will be online, limiting the use of private overlays.  To address
this issue, I propose the reusing of public free-to-join overlays to bootstrap
into a private overlay.  Peers use the public overlay to find each other and
exchange connection information using secure messages.  Only peers with
appropriate security credentials are able to join the private overlay.

DECENTRALIZED RELAYS. In collaborative environments, most peers are behind NATs
and potentially firewalls as well.  While in general most NATs are traversable
through existing approaches, not all are.  Firewalls only complicate the
matter.  While these peers may be able to communicate through the overlay, as
the overlay grows, this latency can become a hinderace to usability and
interactivity.  To improve this situation, I propose the creation of autonomic
2-hop relays between the peers.

USING SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURES FOR MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION OF SECURITY
CREDENTIALS. In order to simplify the management and access to a VPN, this
component explores the use of social networks in terms of both groups and
peers to facilitate trust establishment for a VPN.  Beyond the contribution of
uniquely using social networks to establish VPN trust, this work shows how
systems can leverage trust in an existing environments for use in another.

SELF-CONFIGURING VPN ARCHITECTURES. Many existing VPN approaches require the
users to setup their environment and do not provide a plug and play system.  In
addition, different environments call for different types of VPNs, explicitly,
individual users connect via their own VPN connections, while clusters may
benefit from a shared VPN or may desire fault tolerance of having many but do
not want the communication overhead when talking to VPN peers on the LAN.  I
address this issue with a self-configuring VPN approach that can be applied to
various local environments scaling from a single computer to many.

P2P VPN ENABLED INTERNET TRAFFIC TUNNELING. When in insecure environments such
as browsing private information in a coffee shop, users may desire to prevent
local users and administrators from sniffing their traffic.  Traditional VPNs
support this behavior, but the approach is difficult to implement in P2P
systems due to their dynamic nature.  Currently, no decentralized VPN supports
the ability to perform this behavior.  I propose a method that not only works
for decentralized and P2P systems but ensures a greater level of security than
existing approaches by securing other non-VPN communication between the peer
and gateway resources.

APPLICATIONS IN AD-HOC, DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS. The value in a complex system
like the one proposed herein can be realized when tied together for the
creation of ad-hoc, distributed systems.  The type of system focused on in
this dissertation is a grid.  While there are many grid topologies, approaches
that share resources amongst users and even most that are used by a single
user require a user with expertise in operating systems, networks, and
middleware.  This dissertation shows the applicability of P2P VPN methods and
techniques that can be used to create a trusted, ad-hoc, distributed grid that
requires little if any expertise in the underlying technology being utilized.

DECENTRALIZED SOCIAL NETWORKS. Traditional approaches to social networks, such
as Facebook and MySpace, requires trust in a third-party entity.  These
third-parties mine users information for advertisements, potentially violating
user's privacy.  This dissertation presents a decentralized social network that
addresses real problems by taking advantage of the P2P system described herein
by providing each user in a social network their own private overlay whose
members constitute the friends of that individual.

IMPROVED MODELS FOR DIRECT CONNECTION ESTABLISHMENT.  Originally, direct links
in the P2P VN were based upon packet flow passing a threshold.  Through the use
of profiling real systems and published results of Internet behavior, I have
concluded that this model does not scale well and have design and implemented a
model that satisfactorily solves this problem.

The rest of this dissertation is organized as follows.
Chapter~\ref{chap:vpns} overviews existing VN and VPN approaches and discusses
configuration and organization of the VPN including end-point configuration.
In Chapter~\ref{chap:bootstrapping}, I review the challenges to bootstrapping
overlays and present my solution that reuses existing overlays to bootstrap
smaller, ad-hoc overlays.  This leads into Chapter~\ref{chap:security}, which
discusses security issues in structured overlays and addresses the means to
boot private and secure VPNs.  Chapter~\ref{chap:extensions} covers extensions
to the VPN based upon practical demands and experiences.
Chapters~\ref{chap:gridappliance} describes the Grid Appliance, the target
application for my research.  Chapter~\ref{chap:spo} presents a proposed idea
on how to use the technology discussed thus far to create a decentralized
online social network.  Finally, I conclude in Chapter~\ref{chap:conclusion}
by discussing the value in my contributions and challenges that were revealed
but not addressed in this body of work, thus motivating future work.
